---
title: "MD tag and CIGAR string in SAM/BAm file"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - genomics
  - bioinformatics
  - notes
---

For my current project I had to utilise the MD tag and CIGAR string that accompany each mapped read in SAM/BAM file. Here is my understanding of the information stored in 
MD tag and CIGAR with examples in pysam how to access and process them. 

### Tags
A SAM file stores aligned sequencing reads in a table format. Tags are optional fields containing additional information about a read. A tag consists of 
three elements separated by `:`

1. Two letter TAG key, eg. MD, NM...  
2. A character indicating type of value stored. Available types:  

| Type | Description |
----------------------
| A	| character |
| i	| signed 32-bit integer |
| f	| single-precision float |
| Z	| string |
| H | hex string |
----------------------

3. TAG value  

For example, a tag in a SAM/BAM file `MD:Z:155` indicates that this is a `MD` tag containing string (`Z`) and taking value of `155`. 
See [SAM/BAM format specification](https://genome.sph.umich.edu/wiki/SAM 
https://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/SAMtags.pdf) for more information about different tags.  

#### MD tag
MD tag is a string encoding mismatched and deleted reference bases. It covers only aligned bases, which means it omits any insertions, soft clipped bases, 
padding, reference skips. MD tag is a progression of letters and characters representing *blocks* in the aligned sequence of a read. 
There are three types of *blocks* in the MD tag:

1. Integers, [0 - 9]+ = a run of bases matching the reference sequence.   
2. Letters, usually ACGT = a single base that is different to the reference sequence, the letter indicates the nucleotide that doesn’t match the reference. 
3. ^[Letters] = a dash before the letters indicates a deletion in the aligned sequence. 

{% capture notice-2 %}
#### NOTE

* The non reference bases refer to a forward strand only as all aligned sequences in a BAM/SAM file are represented in forward direction. 
{% endcapture %}

<div class="notice">{{ notice-2 | markdownify }}</div>

#### MD tag vs. CIGAR  
MD tag is not the same as CIGAR string. Althpugh both contains important information about the alignment, devil is in the details. CIGAR string takes the perspective of a read.
This means that it contains the information about soft clipped part of a read or insertions. The same way, CIGAR indicates which part of.a read was succesfully aligned,
BUT provides no clue regarding whether this alignment has occured with or without any mismatches or deletions. Luckily, this information is stored in an MD tag. 
